---
layout: default
title: Components of SIEM
parent: Training Materials
nav_order: 2
---
# Components of SIEM
{: .important-title .no_toc}

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

## Components of SIEM platform
A SIEM solution may cover all or only some of these components. Security concerns vary greatly from company to company, and some features are only used by government systems or where they are required by law.

### 1. Data Aggregation
This component of SIEM is responsible for gathering logs that are generated by devices within the corporate network, like application servers, network devices, and employee workstations.

There are three major log collection methods:
1. Agent-based log collection
2. Agentless log collection
3. API-based log collection

In agent-based log collection, an agent is installed to ingest logs from a file. This doesn't require whatever is generating the logs to support logging directly to you database; instead a seperate process watches for changes to the file and sends the data to your database in a secure manner.

Agentless log collection is possible where the application that is producing the logs supports integrating with your SIEM platform directly. Basically, the agents job is wrapped up into the existing application.

In API-based log collection, logs can be collected from network devices using an application programming interface (API) to collect the logs from the server using a process running on an entirely seperate server. This seperate server can then process the data it recieves through the API and send it through to your database.

### 2. Security Data Analytics
SIEM platforms make security data analytics possible with reports and dashboards. Security Engineers can monitor these dashboards of realtime security data to get an idea of the state of their network, and to identify potential problems as they occur. Many SIEM solutions also generate predefined reports, which assist the company in detecting threats and preparing for security audits.

### 3. Correlation and Security Event Monitoring
This component is on of the most powerful parts of SIEM. Predefined correlation rules allow companies to analyze log data for an relationship that exists between different network activity logs or common attributes. A simple example of a correlation rule is "If a user fails to login many times in a short persioud of time but is then able to log in succesfully, trigger an alert." These correlation rules can detect suspicous activity, a potential breach in the network, and system compromise.

Maintaining these rules is a neverending task as new vulnerabilites and attack vectors surface daily, so this is one of the beneifts of paying for a managed SIEM solution as opposed to developing one from scratch.

### 4. Forensic Analysis
Root cause analysis and incident reports are foundational job duties for Security Engineers. SIEM platforms make that mych easier buy allowing the user to "drill down" through logs of a breach or attack after the fact to determine exactly how the bad actor was able to gain access to the system.

This component of SIEM is often legally mandated.

### 5. Incident Detection and Response
A security incident is an attempted or successful data breach in the corporate network by an bad actor. SIEM platforms detect security incidents as they happen using event correlation, user and entity behaviour analytics (UEBA), and threat intelligence.

Once the incident has been identified, many SIEM platforms support not only triggering alerts but automated actions to neutralize the threat using predefined workflows.

This component of SIEM allows companies to lower their mean time to detect and resolve incidents.

### 6. Real-time Event Response or Alerting Console
SIEM platforms ingest network data in realtime and can instantly notify incident response teams when an incident is detected. 

### 7. Threat Intelligence
There are many public and private threat intelligence feeds that can be used to obtain the contextual information that is require to identify potential security issues in the corporate system before they are exploited.

SIEM platforms can aggregate these threat intelligence feeds and provide an environment where they can be compared to the current state of the network to identify potential security vulnerabilities.

### 8. User and Entity Behaviour Analytics (UEBA)
UEBA uses machine learning techniques to train a behaviour model that represents the normal operation of the corporate network. Once this baseline is set, alerts can be triggered when the network activity deviates too far from the normal behaviour model. These anomolies can then be investigated further, or dealt with using predefined automated rules.

UEBA differes from a correlation engine because it is not rule based. Instead it relies on behavioral analytics.

### 9. IT Compliance Management
Most companies are expected to meet certain regulations regarding data security. These regulations vary by industry and region, but normally there are fines associated with noncomplaince.

Many of the components that have been covered here are required by some regulations. Companies may also need to comply with security audits by third party entities. SIEM platforms allow companies to prepare for these audits and know that they will pass ahead of time.

## Sources
- [SIEM Components](https://www.manageengine.com/log-management/siem/siem-components.html)
